.opencode/instructions.md, before:

---
description: 'Instructions for workspace management, including logging, process management, and running scripts.'
applyTo: '**'
---

# Coding Agent Instructions

## Domain-Specific Pattern Documentation

Before implementing new features, **always check** these domain-specific AGENT.md files to understand existing patterns and avoid recreating functionality:

### Frontend

| File                                                     | Domain              | Key Topics                                                                          |
| -------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `apps/admin/src/components/AGENT.md`                     | Frontend Components | Atomic design (atoms/molecules/organisms), DaisyUI + Tailwind, available components |
| `apps/admin/src/components/organisms/DataTable/AGENT.md` | DataTable Patterns  | Table configuration, columns, sorting, filtering, pagination                        |
| `apps/admin/src/contexts/AGENT.md`                       | React Contexts      | Auth, Theme, Toast, Modal contexts and provider patterns                            |
| `apps/admin/src/hooks/AGENT.md`                          | Frontend Hooks      | `useApi` (MUST use for all API calls), all 33+ hooks categorized                    |
| `apps/admin/src/pages/AGENT.md`                          | Page Patterns       | Route structure, page layouts, data loading patterns                                |

### Backend

| File                                  | Domain              | Key Topics                                             |
| ------------------------------------- | ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| `apps/server-go/AGENT.md`             | Go Server           | fx modules, Echo handlers, Bun ORM, job queues, ADK-Go |
| `apps/server-go/migrations/README.md` | Database Migrations | Goose workflow, creating migrations, rollbacks         |

### Maintenance

- **Update command**: Use `/update-agent-docs` to review and update all AGENT.md files
- **Changelog**: See `docs/AGENT_DOCS_CHANGELOG.md` for update history

## Environment URLs

| Environment | Admin URL                               | Server URL                            |
| ----------- | --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| Local       | `http://localhost:5176`                 | `http://localhost:3002`               |
| Dev         | `https://admin.dev.emergent-company.ai` | `https://api.dev.emergent-company.ai` |

## 1. Logging

Logs are browsed using the **logs MCP server**. Log files are stored in `logs/` (root directory):

```
logs/
├── server/
│   ├── server.log          # Main server log (INFO+)
│   ├── server.error.log    # Server errors only
│   ├── server.debug.log    # Debug output (dev only)
│   └── server.http.log     # HTTP request/response logs
├── admin/
│   ├── admin.out.log       # Vite stdout
│   ├── admin.error.log     # Vite stderr
│   └── admin.client.log    # Browser client logs
```

**Common log queries:** "Check server logs", "Are there any errors?", "Search logs for 'TypeError'"

## 2. Process Management

Services use PID-based process management via workspace CLI or **Workspace MCP server**.

### Hot Reload (Default) — DO NOT RESTART AFTER CODE CHANGES

**Both server (Go) and admin (Vite) have hot reload enabled.**

⚠️ **IMPORTANT: Never restart services after making code changes.** Hot reload automatically picks up changes within 1-2 seconds. Restarting takes ~30 seconds (Go) or ~1.5 minutes (NestJS) and is unnecessary.

**When hot reload works (DO NOT restart):**

- ✅ Editing Go files (handlers, services, stores, etc.)
- ✅ Editing React components, hooks, styles
- ✅ Modifying entities, utilities
- ✅ Changing business logic

**When to restart (rare cases only):**

- ❌ Adding NEW fx modules to `cmd/server/main.go`
- ❌ Changing environment variables
- ❌ After `go mod tidy` / `pnpm install`
- ❌ Server is not responding (check with `pnpm run workspace:status`)

### Checking Service Health

Before restarting, **always check if the server is actually down:**

```bash
pnpm run workspace:status    # Check if services are running
curl http://localhost:3002/health   # Direct health check
```

Only restart if `workspace:status` shows the service is offline or unhealthy.

### Commands

```bash
pnpm run workspace:status    # Check status (USE THIS FIRST)
pnpm run workspace:restart   # Restart all services (ONLY IF NEEDED)
pnpm run workspace:start     # Start all services
pnpm run workspace:stop      # Stop all services
```

**Common mistakes:**

| Wrong                                           | Right                                       |
| ----------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| Restarting after editing a service file         | Just save the file, hot reload handles it   |
| Restarting to "make sure changes are picked up" | Check logs to confirm hot reload worked     |
| `nx run server:build` then manually run         | Hot reload, or `pnpm run workspace:restart` |
| Killing processes with `kill -9`                | `pnpm run workspace:stop`                   |

## 3. Testing

See **`docs/testing/AI_AGENT_GUIDE.md`** for comprehensive guidance.

**Quick commands:**

```bash
nx run admin:test              # Frontend unit tests
nx run admin:test-coverage     # With coverage
nx run admin:e2e               # Browser e2e tests
nx run server-go:test          # Backend unit tests (Go)
nx run server-go:test-e2e      # API e2e tests (Go)
```

## 4. Custom Tools

- **credentials** - Get test user credentials and application URLs
- **open-browser** - Launch isolated browser with test credentials (Chromium preferred)

## 5. Available MCP Servers

MCP tool documentation is available via tool introspection. Key servers:

- **Postgres** - Database queries (use schema-qualified names: `kb.documents`, `core.user_profiles`)
- **Chrome DevTools** - Browser debugging (start with `npm run chrome:debug` first)
- **logs** - Log file browsing
- **Workspace** - Health monitoring, Docker logs, config
- **Langfuse** - AI trace browsing
- **SigNoz** - Observability (traces, logs, metrics, alerts)

## 6. Database Queries

**Always consult `docs/database/schema-context.md` first.**

```sql
-- Use schema-qualified names
SELECT * FROM kb.documents;           -- NOT 'documents'
SELECT * FROM core.user_profiles;     -- NOT 'users'
SELECT * FROM kb.object_extraction_jobs;
```

**Schemas:** `kb` (knowledge base), `core` (users), `public` (extensions)

## 7. Bug Reports & Improvements

- **Bugs:** `docs/bugs/` — Use `docs/bugs/TEMPLATE.md`
- **Improvements:** `docs/improvements/` — Use `docs/improvements/TEMPLATE.md`

Commit message:

chore: replace inline EPF framework+instance with emergent-epf submodule
Remove the entire docs/EPF/ directory (343 bundled framework files and
62 stale instance files) and replace the strategy instance with a git
submodule pointing to emergent-company/emergent-epf.

The EPF CLI now bundles framework content (schemas, templates, wizards,
definitions), so the inline framework copy is no longer needed. The
canonical strategy instance lives in its own repo for single-source-of-
truth management across consumer repos.

- Add git submodule at docs/EPF/_instances/emergent
- Update AGENTS.md with EPF Strategy Context section
- Update .opencode/instructions.md with submodule instructions

.opencode/instructions.md, after:

---
description: 'Instructions for workspace management, including logging, process management, and running scripts.'
applyTo: '**'
---

# Coding Agent Instructions

## Domain-Specific Pattern Documentation

Before implementing new features, **always check** these domain-specific AGENT.md files to understand existing patterns and avoid recreating functionality:

### Frontend

| File                                                     | Domain              | Key Topics                                                                          |
| -------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `apps/admin/src/components/AGENT.md`                     | Frontend Components | Atomic design (atoms/molecules/organisms), DaisyUI + Tailwind, available components |
| `apps/admin/src/components/organisms/DataTable/AGENT.md` | DataTable Patterns  | Table configuration, columns, sorting, filtering, pagination                        |
| `apps/admin/src/contexts/AGENT.md`                       | React Contexts      | Auth, Theme, Toast, Modal contexts and provider patterns                            |
| `apps/admin/src/hooks/AGENT.md`                          | Frontend Hooks      | `useApi` (MUST use for all API calls), all 33+ hooks categorized                    |
| `apps/admin/src/pages/AGENT.md`                          | Page Patterns       | Route structure, page layouts, data loading patterns                                |

### Backend

| File                                  | Domain              | Key Topics                                             |
| ------------------------------------- | ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| `apps/server-go/AGENT.md`             | Go Server           | fx modules, Echo handlers, Bun ORM, job queues, ADK-Go |
| `apps/server-go/migrations/README.md` | Database Migrations | Goose workflow, creating migrations, rollbacks         |

### Maintenance

- **Update command**: Use `/update-agent-docs` to review and update all AGENT.md files
- **Changelog**: See `docs/AGENT_DOCS_CHANGELOG.md` for update history

## Environment URLs

| Environment | Admin URL                               | Server URL                            |
| ----------- | --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| Local       | `http://localhost:5176`                 | `http://localhost:3002`               |
| Dev         | `https://admin.dev.emergent-company.ai` | `https://api.dev.emergent-company.ai` |

## EPF Strategy Context

The company-wide EPF strategy instance is at `docs/EPF/_instances/emergent/`.
This is a **git submodule** pointing to `emergent-company/emergent-epf`.

```bash
# If the directory is empty after cloning, initialize the submodule:
git submodule update --init

# To update to the latest strategy:
git submodule update --remote docs/EPF/_instances/emergent
```

Use EPF CLI MCP tools (epf-strategy server) with `instance_path: "docs/EPF/_instances/emergent"` for strategic context lookups, value model analysis, and feature-strategy alignment.

## 1. Logging

Logs are browsed using the **logs MCP server**. Log files are stored in `logs/` (root directory):

```
logs/
├── server/
│   ├── server.log          # Main server log (INFO+)
│   ├── server.error.log    # Server errors only
│   ├── server.debug.log    # Debug output (dev only)
│   └── server.http.log     # HTTP request/response logs
├── admin/
│   ├── admin.out.log       # Vite stdout
│   ├── admin.error.log     # Vite stderr
│   └── admin.client.log    # Browser client logs
```

**Common log queries:** "Check server logs", "Are there any errors?", "Search logs for 'TypeError'"

## 2. Process Management

Services use PID-based process management via workspace CLI or **Workspace MCP server**.

### Hot Reload (Default) — DO NOT RESTART AFTER CODE CHANGES

**Both server (Go) and admin (Vite) have hot reload enabled.**

⚠️ **IMPORTANT: Never restart services after making code changes.** Hot reload automatically picks up changes within 1-2 seconds. Restarting takes ~30 seconds (Go) or ~1.5 minutes (NestJS) and is unnecessary.

**When hot reload works (DO NOT restart):**

- ✅ Editing Go files (handlers, services, stores, etc.)
- ✅ Editing React components, hooks, styles
- ✅ Modifying entities, utilities
- ✅ Changing business logic

**When to restart (rare cases only):**

- ❌ Adding NEW fx modules to `cmd/server/main.go`
- ❌ Changing environment variables
- ❌ After `go mod tidy` / `pnpm install`
- ❌ Server is not responding (check with `pnpm run workspace:status`)

### Checking Service Health

Before restarting, **always check if the server is actually down:**

```bash
pnpm run workspace:status    # Check if services are running
curl http://localhost:3002/health   # Direct health check
```

Only restart if `workspace:status` shows the service is offline or unhealthy.

### Commands

```bash
pnpm run workspace:status    # Check status (USE THIS FIRST)
pnpm run workspace:restart   # Restart all services (ONLY IF NEEDED)
pnpm run workspace:start     # Start all services
pnpm run workspace:stop      # Stop all services
```

**Common mistakes:**

| Wrong                                           | Right                                       |
| ----------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| Restarting after editing a service file         | Just save the file, hot reload handles it   |
| Restarting to "make sure changes are picked up" | Check logs to confirm hot reload worked     |
| `nx run server:build` then manually run         | Hot reload, or `pnpm run workspace:restart` |
| Killing processes with `kill -9`                | `pnpm run workspace:stop`                   |

## 3. Testing

See **`docs/testing/AI_AGENT_GUIDE.md`** for comprehensive guidance.

**Quick commands:**

```bash
nx run admin:test              # Frontend unit tests
nx run admin:test-coverage     # With coverage
nx run admin:e2e               # Browser e2e tests
nx run server-go:test          # Backend unit tests (Go)
nx run server-go:test-e2e      # API e2e tests (Go)
```

## 4. Custom Tools

- **credentials** - Get test user credentials and application URLs
- **open-browser** - Launch isolated browser with test credentials (Chromium preferred)

## 5. Available MCP Servers

MCP tool documentation is available via tool introspection. Key servers:

- **Postgres** - Database queries (use schema-qualified names: `kb.documents`, `core.user_profiles`)
- **Chrome DevTools** - Browser debugging (start with `npm run chrome:debug` first)
- **logs** - Log file browsing
- **Workspace** - Health monitoring, Docker logs, config
- **Langfuse** - AI trace browsing
- **SigNoz** - Observability (traces, logs, metrics, alerts)

## 6. Database Queries

**Always consult `docs/database/schema-context.md` first.**

```sql
-- Use schema-qualified names
SELECT * FROM kb.documents;           -- NOT 'documents'
SELECT * FROM core.user_profiles;     -- NOT 'users'
SELECT * FROM kb.object_extraction_jobs;
```

**Schemas:** `kb` (knowledge base), `core` (users), `public` (extensions)

## 7. Bug Reports & Improvements

- **Bugs:** `docs/bugs/` — Use `docs/bugs/TEMPLATE.md`
- **Improvements:** `docs/improvements/` — Use `docs/improvements/TEMPLATE.md`
